um i'm really thrilled to introduce our
next speaker
cheyenne concepcion
cheyenne is a multi-disciplinary artist
and designer based in san francisco she
creates work that examines the politics
of place using installation social
practice sculpture and textile drawing
on her interest in research and urban
planning and utilizing her training as a
designer concepcion's work is a site is
site-specific and is censored on a cult
centered on cultural memory place-based
activism migration and often has a
public component
she is the co-founder and artistic
director of the new monument task force
a fantastical municipal agency engaged
in the dialogue development and design
of new monuments in california
over to you cheyenne
hi everyone my name is cheyenne
concepcion i am an artist and designer
between new york and san francisco my
work uncovers the politics of place
through installation social practice
textile
and i'm the artistic director of new
monuments task force a fantastical
municipal agency
engaged in the dialogue design and
development of new monuments in
california
my talk today is titled the artist in
the city
and it explores recent ruminations of
mine and
what i'm learning about my role as an
artist in the city
and i hope you like it
so i will share my screen
okay
so
the story goes like this
it's february of 2020 and i'm beginning
to plan an art installation for a
transnational group exhibition titled
shaping the past
it's an initiative by monument lab and
the gert institute addressing what whom
and how we remember in public spaces
it was supposed to future artists from
around the world myself included mostly
public artists working in collaborative
ways
and so i was planning to showcase my
project
borderlands archive which is an
independent archive i started in 2018
the project traces connection across
territorial divide it's an exploration
of place
of cultural memory of a misunderstood
landscape between two countries
um we kind of show our work as an
exhibition like
the one we had here in new york
and also as a web platform
where we showcase artifacts that we've
collected from books um
photographs uh donated objects
news maps
and
hopefully it will
kind of serve as a resource in the
future
um
when we look back at this place
so everything was going well
in february of 2020
until it quickly wasn't
and so
oops
sorry i don't know why this is there
and so in february 20 of 20
and everything changed especially in
california everything kind of stopped
and as artists all of us were working in
public spaces and when the idea of
gathering in collaborative ways and
being in public space at all
came off the table our projects halted
and we kind of regrouped and stayed safe
but by july of 2020 we picked our
project back up again
but but by july 2020 everything had
changed
the world had changed america had
changed and i had changed because of it
following the murder of george floyd
there was an ongoing passionate national
conversation about race and
representation
in the u.s there was a deep frustration
about countless injustices of how
america treats black and brown bodies
at this time the national conversation
became a local one all over the city
monuments were being reckoned with and
on juneteenth in golden gate park
protesters toppled numerous monuments in
the music concourse
and there were several vandalized across
the city
francis got key and penitent here
meanwhile that same weekend sf officials
were removing monuments in the middle of
the night this is christopher columbus
at quite tower
and at the same time a political debacle
around the dr maya angelou monument
was evolving right before my eyes
initially accepted then rejected in 2019
berkeley artist lava thomas's proposal
for the dr maya angelou monument was
quickly scrapped due to its design
in short it wasn't traditional enough
in a 2019 statement by supervisor
catherine stephanie who sponsored the
public art legislation claimed that the
monument design didn't elevate maya
in the same way that men had been
elevated across history
she was talking about the non-figurative
form of the sculpture
she was talking about the need for more
pedestals and more bronze
following all this in a 20 a july 2020
public meeting that i attended the sfac
muted the end of lava thomas's speech
addressing the controversy
inadvertently
muting her
and this caused national and local
outrage
uh collectives like this see black women
cropped up to stand in solidarity with
lava and rightfully so
and finally
mayor london breed in mid-july of 2020
ordered the sf arts commission to create
a committee
and municipal study to elevate evaluate
the city's 94 public monuments and
memorials and their intersection with
our country's racist history
and so it was definitely a moment in san
francisco at the time
and i think it was this weekend
where
i was
you know working as a public artist
in this space thinking about how we are
represented in public art thinking about
how i i create public art
and also
being kind of an active member of my
citizen
member of my city excuse me i decided
that i would
co-opt the city's municipal study and
and
respective
advisory committee
and so new monuments task force starts
here
the project emerged out of the idea to
co-opt the city's municipal process but
do it better
do it in a way that serves us
they had fumbled so hard until now how
could they possibly get it right at this
point
also the national context kind of peeked
into my mind if not now
then when
why not now
and another question why not me
why not a brown woman who was first
generational never had seen a monument
that represented anything like her
upbringing or looked anything like her
and why not me a rogue urban designer
turned public artist
even with all these questions i knew
where i needed to start
i
wanted to rebel in the idea of being an
outsider
what can't the city touch i thought what
can't they
take space over i thought
that's exactly where i wanted to start i
wanted to take control of that space the
space outside the institution
just to create a participatory larger
than life work about our institutional
structures and how they've manifested in
our public art
public art offices are really really
good at collecting data
but i think what artists can do is
create timely points for critical
inquiry
they can create
moments of
intense reflection
they can create public awareness
i thought if monuments are so top down
can this project be bottom up
could i create a project that shifts the
power dynamics in the city in some way
could i create change
and for me as an artist that is the most
exciting question
understanding our agency
as artists is something that i am
developing day by day
but i often fall back on this quote by
one of my mentors stephanie ciuko
and i highlight the last part because i
think it's so central to this project
what should the questions be
i think at the time
when i was developing the project the
city was
um also developing their their project
they were talking about monetary figures
of the monuments studying the
maintenance plans who gets to take care
of them whose responsibility is it
people were also asking questions about
who was the worst figure who was the
most racist
colonial monument of all and
it was almost like a where's waldo for
monuments in a way
and to me when i was observing this i
kind of was thinking that no one was
asking the right questions
and no one was asking questions like
what are the narratives being
communicated as a whole through these
art objects
what is our relationship to monuments
what is our relationship to public art
can these objects engage us to think
critically
to see ourselves can they engage us to
see the truth
and so
while developing these questions
associated with this work i was building
a brain trust of artists curators
non-profit cultural leaders
and activists
i like to think of us as outsiders
a motley crew maybe
i think that public art needs eyes
it's a collective process after all
and i needed an advisory committee i
needed to create a task force
so i recruited fellow artists curators
mentors and even cold called bay area
cultural workers who i knew was doing
the work such as xavier buck from the
huey p newton foundation
and i asked them to join our efforts
who hadn't been at the table i thought
if that's you
you can sit with us you can work with us
and i felt like there was a lot of power
in that
so i led the three-part unofficial
municipal study and i titled it the
relic report
it was supposed to be in three parts so
what i'm showing you here is relic
report volume one
and it was designed to introduce the
project
and the main questions and also present
a public comment survey with which i was
going to pull
um sf residents about with
excuse me
so i
drew from my background in urban design
and landscape architecture and employed
the typology study as the main
methodology for assessment
i used categories and groupings to weigh
the collection as a whole
who were the most celebrated individuals
why what was their gender diversity what
was their racial diversity what were the
different design styles what were the
different materials used where did they
come from
so we came up with six different
categories and i'll go through them the
first one here is the boys club
and so you can see the the gender
diversity of
the monument collection in san francisco
with 53 men
and three women
there was other factors like there was
actually a lot of women representation
in the collective in the collection
such as women representing men like
angels or
lady liberty
um so that was kind of interesting but
only three women represented real women
there were
the ogs which were 15 monuments
commemorating prominent men of colonial
expeditions
there was modernish which was inspired
by the recent call in in san francisco
for more traditional monuments so i
wanted to look at the non-traditional
ones where did they come from
what did they celebrate
there was war and peace turns out
there's ten celebrating war and two
celebrating peace
there's artists and idealists which were
often gifts from other countries and
many of them litter golden gate park
and there was what remains which were
monuments that were hard to place often
bureaucrats or
city or state
you know figures
they were also
weirdly located monuments hard to find
somewhat forgotten and i thought that
that brought up some kind of
idea about what our relationship to
monuments as a whole are do we notice
them when we walk by and have they moved
us in any way and
um to me that feels like a missed
opportunity
and so after we released volume one we
commenced a public comment period we
like this project was supposed to co-opt
municipal process and processes and use
it for us and so that's what we did and
we published a public comment survey
which was available online
and through a mailer campaign
and the survey asked seven qualitative
questions
um i wanted to start where the sfac
couldn't start so i wanted to focus on
things that were harder to answer things
that were subjective
things about
personal
um
views
and so
we had around 100 respondents to our
survey
over 30 days
and um
that all got compiled into a second
volume of relic report which highlighted
amazing feedback
by san francisco citizens about what
they want to see in the monuments of the
future
what has hurt you in the past what do
you think a monument is how can
we improve our definition of monuments
and so we had the most beautiful
responses people spent a lot of time
sending in really thoughtful responses
and so we tried to
showcase this collective process through
our second edition
which we show here
and so it's organized by the seven
different survey questions and we kind
of summarize with
our recommendations as a task force so
the task force met
three separate times to kind of go over
the
tons of um
community input and kind of curate what
were the most important messages that we
wanted to see in the booklet
and most importantly we also created six
recommendations for new monuments
because this was this is an unofficial
city study remember so we needed to come
up with recommendations as city studies
do
and so i'm going to read them out loud
because in talks like this i like to
read them out loud because i think it's
part of the ritual of what we went
through over six months together
and so it goes like this
um number one new monuments must expand
public knowledge number two new
monuments must not be on the side of
oppression
number three new monuments must disrupt
idea old ideas of what monuments can be
number four
new monuments must be dynamic and
ever-changing
number five new monuments must tell
stories on a community level
and number six new monuments must
challenge observers to stop and think
twice
and so relic report has become our
guiding document it lights the way
forward for new monument task forces
future initiatives
and
even today i still look back on the book
every month or so when i'm working on
projects because it has so much amazing
content in it
and on that note i wanted to talk about
some of the initiatives that we've had
in 2021 mostly since publishing the
relic report
so here we were able to project our six
demands on the side of ybca in downtown
sf
um as part of the sf urban film festival
for a couple months every night and so
that was pretty cool taking that public
space
um
our another initiative we did was a
workshop called marble and media lab in
which we partnered with zero one art and
technology
and new media artist camilla mcgrade
and so
this was a really fun project where we
wanted to create a workshop and cite it
at a really important place
i discussed this earlier in my my talk
which was the music concourse and a lot
had happened there
in juneteenth of 2020 so
being um
what new monuments task force is which
is kind of this renegade public art
agency i wanted to take up space in a
very obvious way and kind of cite this
workshop at this site of protest and
reckon with the monuments or toppled
monuments using augmented reality there
and so we
um
with the help of camilla who's kind of
an ar expert
we found
eight emerging artists from the bay area
and supported their projects and had
them
kind of choose a monument to
create a project around we
created workshops with different skill
building tools and then ultimately did
gorilla public art walking tour at the
end and so i'm just going to show some
projects this is one of
the artists caleb lightfoot and
he did
francis scott key and so he kind of went
into the different stages of history
that this monument had experienced i
think 2020 was the second one with the
blm protests
and then he imagined that the next one
would be it's ruin
and following its ruin would be this
kind of historical analysis of what
happened there what that was and the
fragments of the flag and the fragments
of the monument
kind of become hyper analyzed in an
archaeological plate
and then finally he reconstructs this
scene in augmented reality with the with
the rubble and he ultimately projected
it at the site so this is kind of just
an example of one of the projects that
we had
here is a map of the different projects
as a whole
and i'm going to share two videos with
you
[Music]
this is hannah scott i think she's she
works at gray area so hello welcome to
future society x's department of
historical recontextualization
we are committed to a radically new
understanding of history that endangers
the complexity of our past rather than
asserting a single narrative that bends
toward progress statues attempt to
collapse the past into a single story to
cast kaleidoscopic oops actually i
wasn't supposed to do that i was just
supposed to show you the next one which
is may ross's work an indigenous artist
who wanted to showcase the landscape
before
it was found by a monument that honors
three
men
navigators
and finally our most recent initiative
is called in the future and it's a
digital zine where we're curating and
spotlighting artists who are creating
public art that
are reimagining new ways of taking up
space in the public
and so we put out an international call
and we're currently building a website
and web platform for which to view
this work and we felt like we needed to
do this because all of our projects in
the past focused on the past i think
2020 was that five we were reckoning
with everything we've inherited
inherited until now
and this project we were brainstorming
about and we're like we should we should
start thinking about the future now and
it feels fresh and i'm excited about it
and it should be um
readily to view in two months
and so i'm going to finish this talk to
finish up
why i'm here and the things i've been
trying to explain through this talk and
um through my thought process is
so what is the role of the artists in
the city
and i can tell you that through
monuments task force i've learned that
my role as an artist in the city
is very crucial
um at a time of reckoning and reflection
artists have the skills to create a
conversation about trauma and repair
artists also have the potential to
negotiate ethics
which create more just environments
which create more just
cities and so four things i want
you guys to come away with today um are
four things i think artists can do
artists can create awareness
like the gorilla girls feminist poster
series
artists can piece together fragmentary
evidence
like forensic architectures
tactical based
research approach
and they're amazing projects shown here
triple chaser
artists can create collaborative action
like decolonize this place and their
poster series about how to take a
monument down
and
artists can ask the right questions like
we did in san francisco
i think these four things together can
create power
and if we can create power
we can create change
and that's all i have but thank you for
having me welcome back everybody um i'm
so excited to be here live with cheyenne
um what an amazing
community practice that the new
monuments task works is i mean it was so
cool to see the way that you brought
people together around this common goal
of making positive impact in our public
spaces um
you know and there was one part of your
presentation you know and when you were
reading out the um
oh gosh what did what would you i don't
want to say man would you recommend
recommendations i wanted to say
manifesto but i was like maybe that's
like a little too political or something
but um
the um
you know the recommendations like new
monuments should always be dynamic like
that was a point that i felt was
particularly cogent um and interesting
because the concept of a monument is so
static like the whole point of it being
like it's it's it's almost like it's
ontology is rooted in its permanence or
perceived permanence so i would love to
talk a little bit more about that
dynamism and you know how
that would manifest itself across any
kind of new new monument
yeah
um
so i
i love that recommendation and i think
it kind of what you what you're talking
about is how we've pr traditionally kind
of conceived monuments and what we think
of them as
i mean they've been around forever
so it's something that's almost
ingrained in us but i think we're kind
of in a time where we're re
we're it's kind of up for grabs to
redefine it and i've kind of
get that question a lot um
monuments are you know static objects
they're
they're um
usually to kind of commemorate men and
um
national victories or things like that
and
um i think we're kind of entering a time
where we're rejecting that definition
and we definitely did that two years ago
or i guess it's only been a year
actually in 2020 and now i feel like
it's kind of an exciting time because
people are wanting to know what's next
and i feel like this idea of having a
dynamic monument
is um
is a really good place to start and
i think the person that submitted
a lot of our recommendations were based
off of citizen input and so the person
that kind of commented
on um
dynamism was really kind of pushing this
idea of also including technology and
kind of um
a
multi-sensory kind of an experience of a
monument because that's kind of where
they failed until now right so why
wouldn't you start at the place of
the breaking point i guess and so
let's unpack it
no totally i mean it's and i mean
augmented reality feels like a medium
that
avails itself to that really nicely in
the sense that you can have some kind of
marker that's visible
um in in physical reality that perhaps
you know is something that is
purely abstract you know that doesn't
have any kind of
you know
moral ethical
con you know connotation to it and as
you know values change we can update in
augmented reality what that
manifestation of that might be i mean
that's just one kind of way that i could
imagine this this working you know as we
saw that uh the sculpture with the sound
playing um and you know i could easily
see that becoming a different shape to
match the needs of a certain time or the
words the the words that are spoken um
as part of the audio
part of it um could be altered to be
more inclusive and add to you know more
add more voices to
you know what that monument stands for
um
and so i mean it just it just seems so
ripe with possibility and i i love that
idea of breaking away from the
staticness of this idea of permanence
because truly you know i think
permanence in itself is kind of a kind
of a fallacy um you know i don't think
anything is totally forever and we have
to be adaptable to those kinds of those
kinds of change and that's also
something that worlding protocol is
really rooted in is like we can't think
of the world as this one fixed thing we
have to continue to reassess and
re-evaluate all of the interdependencies
that we have here yeah
yeah we have a number of oh sorry go
ahead
no go ahead go ahead good oh just gonna
say i have a couple uh questions from
the audience that um have just come in
um hannah's here actually uh who we were
just speaking about um and
i would love to hear more from cheyenne
about how and if she approaches the
fantastical satirical um task force as a
form of world building
i love
the project because it's this
amazing little vehicle to kind of talk
about a lot of things i often feel like
i take on big projects like that where
i'm like driving this big bus but it
feels much bigger than me but
that
satirical voice that um
it kind of punk rock like when i was
thinking about the project and i don't
view myself as punk but i feel like that
project is definitely it is definitely
punk and i try to like get that out of
it with the project voice
um but i think the satirical
the playfulness
at the end of the day i think it is kind
of cheeky and snarky and funny but i i
am talking about serious things
um not you know there there's a lot of
pain that's been kind of
um
felt by these are art objects it's it's
a public work so you you there are more
expectations of public art to kind of
serve
community to kind of serve like a
narrative of the city kind of um you
know
um so they they do have jobs like i feel
like monuments do have jobs and
um as public objects they should
serve community and so i am talking
about serious things with a kind of like
cheeky
approach to it
and i feel like that helps deliver the
point
in a in a
better way
when the project
started i it started out of this idea to
co-opt a city um agency
and i wanted to do everything like they
couldn't do which was have a voice have
um
do things quickly
have agency
my voice is very strong in and snarky in
that in the relic report and
um i encourage
like for example the workshop we did i
was i was encouraging people in the
workshop to also
use your your voice and your perspective
and
loudly and
so it's something that
[Music]
i use to disguise
something very serious and something
that's kind of hard to talk about
and complex and there's a lot of
differing opinions and i feel like
that
playfulness and it's part of the art of
it you know is to kind of subvert the
message and make you think like
if i came to you on the street and was
like let's talk about monuments i'd
ought to like you know someone would put
their hand in my face or like walk away
immediately but
um
part of the delivery is important
because it opens up
it's like the entry point for the idea
right and so
and the idea is a messy idea like
monuments are extremely messy
um political objects and so
how it's not easy to talk about and i
feel like the playfulness and the punk
rockness
attitude it serves that
in a way
absolutely i was just talking the other
day about you know we were talking about
virtual reality and i was you know i was
talking to my friend tina and
um we were saying that you know
in after covet and like kind of all of
the different like webgl and metaverse
projects and augmented reality projects
that have been popping up everywhere you
know we were talking about a return to
the vr headset because it's kind of like
a kitsch
this object at this point you know it's
a it's such a funny experience that like
is still like the best kind of thing
that we have in certain regards um and
the thing that to me about that
particular medium that i find an
augmented reality as well is that it's
so absurd you know it's like the
absurdity of it like
makes it more immersive it makes the
world feel more real it gives you this
kind of like different kind of and
honestly more intimate because when
you're laughing at something and when
something is kind of peaking your
interest in that way you you kind of
come closer to it um and it really it
feels more and more intimate
um it's like
the bodily experience you know because
you're kind of
outside of the work this world this
couch that i'm sitting in at like
immediately you know versus looking at
something
on your phone and still being rooted in
this space i feel like it's
it's kind of a transition
um
yeah using the website you didn't use
those we used phones for our um
workshop
phones and tablets
well something else about you know and
this is something i asked a couple other
guests this question and you know i have
some i have my own interesting ideas
about this question but i'd love to pose
this to you in the context of the of the
new monuments project um you know
augmented reality is a really
fascinating medium because in a lot of
ways it exemplifies what
exemplifies the capability of simulation
to do anything but at the same time when
you create an image on your phone you
can't touch it you know like you can you
know you can make a filter that turns
all the grass into lava but when you
touch the grass you're not going to get
burned kind of thing um and so to me
there's this really interesting like
duality or tension there um not even
duality i hate to speak in a binary but
you know there's this tension that's
existing there between the possible and
the impossible um and i'm wondering you
know
how you how i mean how do you think
through that that tension between
something that you know is on your phone
and kind of feels impermanent versus the
you know unless you go back to
permanence i mean we
but um
do you know what i'm saying yeah
um
i when you're talking something that
came to mind i don't know if this is
necessarily related to our experience
but
with the marbling media project but
it it
you kind of made me want to
think about taking augmented reality to
a next step by involving
your body like the experience isn't just
visual like what if you can kind of
um cause say okay now touch the monument
or something you know and then and then
it becomes like more performative i
think in some way and
um it made me think about if we want to
restage the marble and media project and
do it in a more controlled environment
maybe more of a gallery space
um because it's something that was hard
actually if you want to talk about
augmented reality it was actually
something hard to pull off in a public
environment because there was so much
other
things going on i don't know if you've
been to the music concourse but it's i
think even during the pandemic it got
even crazier but there's just hundreds
of people walking and
it's hard um
to get get your phone to kind of
recognize it with all the movement and
so i feel like this
the next step
of well
from what we learned and if we
if we would do it in a public place i'd
say
um
would to kind of almost embrace the
movement i don't know how to do that i'm
just like thinking about ideas of what
how augmented reality could be improved
at least
with the idea you know what i mean
that's the first step is we have to
imagine what could be in order to make
it so um and i think that that this is
sort of connected to another audience
question that we have this comes from
auto art machine
and they ask cheyenne i'm curious about
what you think of physical and ar
transformations of monuments versus
total removal like and to me that kind
of reads is like is it possible to undo
the harm of the physical monument causes
through a purely
virtual
uh transformation
um i don't
think i think undoing the harm is
a big task i don't know if any
um intervention could like um totally
remedy that but
i do think i love this idea of layering
and i think that it should be
yes augmented reality like
looking at hannah's project and the
things we were doing and then the music
concourse
there is this idea of layering of
history that is kind of inherently
involved with ar so i love that and i
think that the layers could also be
physical i think that people should stop
taking care of the monuments there's
someone employed by the city running
around
scraping bird poop off of all of the
monuments i feel like there there should
be a layer of age a layer of disrepair
because these are old ideas
if if someone splashes red paint on it
out of you know
protest i would i like this idea of
leaving it there or letting it
age and
kind of into a room in and then i think
that
we wouldn't
not learn the lesson that way and i'm
actually um
i'm not an advocate for removing them i
think that they should stay in place and
there should be creative actions around
them or they they could be moved to
another
location and contextualized differently
but i
i love this idea of layering and i think
that ar does it really well and then
there's this also idea of us
you know
right now in 2021 we're reckoning with
these ideas but someone's gonna
there's gonna be
another
another voice not heard there's gonna be
another um kind of
wave of thinkers in 20 years and so we
should continue to layer on this like
this um object i i think that ar is is
kind of something that is
a really easy alternative to to work
with now and something i want to keep
doing and i know other public art
offices are thinking about too
absolutely um
thinking about public art offices we
have a question from barry um who asked
and this is a great question because i'm
curious too what was this what is the
city's response been if at all to to
this project
so we had been in contact with them from
the beginning because of our connections
with the gerta institute
and so they've listened and
we've had private conversations and um
we even they they still haven't
published their reports so they're still
working on that and they've just
assembled
a
um task force one of our task force
members is on their task force so we'll
find out more but they haven't met yet
so
it's slowly coming along i think that
they had a really big push for more
public input and i don't want to take
full credit for that but i think that
our kind of push to have more of a
public facing project really did
did uh
affect that affect their process i
really do think it did because
when we when we were first discussing it
it wasn't
it wasn't or when we were when they
first
kind of came out and said that they were
going to take on a project like that it
was never
kind of discussed and now it seems like
that it's a center point of their
strategy so that makes me feel like we
kind of did our job
i also know because of
they were looking for a consultant and
we were kind of entertaining that idea
so i know that they they do know we also
carry knowledge so
i think that
i wish them the best and they haven't
we'll see what they publish in a year or
two
and we'll continue to do our work and
leading the way and i think a lot of our
um
projects are speculative
but they
have solutions to them like we we are we
are making good suggestions and yeah we
do kind of we had an origin of trolling
them like lovingly trolling them in a
little way but i i think that
we want the same outcome we want um
we want more representation and form and
allegory of monuments
we want
more artists of color making them we
want more funding for new ideas we want
more dynamic monuments
as we said
amazing well i mean those i'm gonna
leave it with those with those requests
um because i i hope that people can you
know listen to them really internalize
them and yeah think about strategies
that we can all work together to to meet
them um because it's so clear that our
public spaces need to change and the
morals and the values that were uh
that were in popular favor are no longer
and i love that idea of leaving a
monument to rot because if an idea is
really still true and still relevant to
a society um that society will build a
new monument you know and so you know
it's it's gonna you know if that's still
relevant then it will it will continue
to be but if it's not we can let it we
can let that be a thing of the past
i know exactly nice way to leave it out
thank you so much for being here
cheyenne it was so wonderful to have you
thanks good luck today
thanks so much bye